---
title: Your Neighborhood Scientist
date: 2025-03-20
permalink: /posts/2020/04/blog-post-17/
tags:
  - NIH
  - rare disease day
  - science communication
og_image: /images/podcast.png
og_type: website
og_title: Your Neighborhood Scientist
  
---

Some friends from my training at the Univeristy of Michigan have launched a new initiative, called Your Neighborhood Scientist (YNS), to cultivate community-based conversations about science, science policy, and scientists. 

My colleague and YNS co-founder, Dr. Audrey Drotos, described the motivation behind YNS: "Currently, scientific misinformation and disinformation are spreading at unprecedented levels, and people are struggling to evaluate the veracity of claims they're exposed to. We want to rebuild and regain trust in science by embedding scientists and science advocates within our communities and giving them the tools to build relationships and shift the narrative about science."

I had the privilege of writing the first guest [blog about my experiences with the NIH Intramural program](https://neighborhoodscientist.org/posts/2025/nih-intramural-first-job-saving-mom/). In the blog, I share my family's personal experiences with the NIH as my mom has been enrolled in two clinical trials at the National Cancer Institute since spring 2022 for her rare disease. The blog was published on February 28, 2025 which was Rare Disease Day. Ironically, this was also the day Dr. Francis Collins abruptly resigned from the NIH after a distinguished career 32 year career of service at the NIH. In my blog, I also share my experience learning and growing as a postbaccalaureate IRTA fellow at the National Human Genome Research Institute in the lab of Dr. Collins.
I care deeply about the future of the NIH, and hope you will join me in advocating for funding of biomedical research through the NIH Intramural and Extramural programs with your elected representatives.

Another way to get involved is to share your story! Your Neighborhood Scientist is seeking scientists to write articles (500-1000 words) about who they are, why they love science, and the impact of their work. If you're interested in contributing, please email your@neighborhoodscientist.org.








